---
objectid: ipnw-0006
title: Table Rock Cross
---

While watching a football game on the blue turf of Boise State University, walking into the steps of the Idaho state capitol building, or visiting the Old Idaho Penitentiary, one thing remains the same. If you face east and look towards the foothills, a large white cross upon the plateau is always visible. The large installation, built in 1956, 60 feet tall and weighing 4,500 pounds, features clean, simple lines that form a traditional Christian cross.[^1] While many often overlook the large structure amidst the routine of everyday life, the cross represents a long-standing history of religious and political division in the Treasure Valley.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ipnw-objects-0075" caption="Early photo of Table Rock Cross, 1950s to 1960s." %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ipnw-objects-0076" caption="Contemporary photo of Table Rock Cross, 2025." %}

In the 19th century, religious groups expanded into the southern regions of what is now the state of Idaho to migrate and establish settlements, where they indoctrinated and assimilated Native tribes, including the Shoshone and Bannock.[^4] The invasion of native lands created hostility between the settlers and native groups. In 1867, the Shoshone and Bannock were forced onto the Fort Hall reservation in Southeastern Idaho.[^5] Although the cross would not be built for another century, this religious colonization sought to erase Native presence and paved the path for religious groups to effectively create and control the religious, political, and cultural landscape of Idaho.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ipnw-objects-0006" caption="Chapel of the Good Shepherd and mission school at Fort Hall." %}

The Table Rock Cross was erected in 1956 by the Junior Chamber of Commerce of Boise, also known as the Jaycees.[^7] When the Jaycees were first established, the club was focused on free enterprise and community involvement. Simultaneously, rising tensions of the Cold War led to McCarthyism and widespread fears that communism could reach the homes of American families.[^8] The Jaycees built the cross to deter anyone from believing the city was an atheist community.[^9] However, later in the 1950s, the club shifted its intentions to promoting Christianity.[^10] The land on which the cross was built was originally owned by the Department of Corrections as public land. In 1956, the Jaycees officially approved the project, later raising \$880 to purchase and create the site.[^11] After the raising of the cross, the site faced various incidents of vandalism, often requiring the group to continually raise funds to repair the site. Following the string of vandalism, only two years after the cross was built, the Idaho Statesman published an article in June 1957, calling for the apprehension of the vandals, writing “But it has happened, and undoubtedly will happen again and again until some mentally deficient individual is brought to task”.[^12] This response to vandalism shows how the cross represented more than a religious symbol; it was perceived as a personal attack and reflected a cultural anxiety tied to anticommunism and post-war morality for Americans.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ipnw-objects-0005" caption="Idaho Statesman (Boise, Idaho), June 17, 1957" %}

The cross has long been mired in debate and controversy, including the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) questioning the legality of how the land was acquired to keep the cross standing, and the Jaycees continuously raising money to maintain the site.[^14] A central event of the Table Rock cross was when Rob Sherman, an atheist from Chicago, advocated for the removal of the religious symbol.[^15]

In response to the activist, the Jaycees campaigned through the Idaho Statesman for residents to march in support of the cross to the Idaho State Capitol building on November 27, 1999.[^16] The Idaho Statesman released a front-page article the following day titled “10,000 Join March to Keep Table Rock Cross Standing”.[^17] The feature describes how thousands of men, women, and children cried, gave speeches, and marched to the Capitol building with wooden crosses in hand.[^18] The event was a significant victory for the Jaycees, yet the tension in Boise remained. Residents varied across the board, some wanting the cross to stay due to religious beliefs, calling for its removal, or wishing the public would focus on significant issues affecting the community.

The clash of opinions led to residents directly responding to or challenging each other's opinions. On Christmas Day, 1999, the Letters to the Editor of the Idaho Statesman featured Gary Bennett questioning the true intentions of the Jaycees, the Hopper family urging the community to focus on hunger or housing, and Betty Pfander commending the club for its hard work.[^19] Despite its controversial history, residents and visitors in Boise can still look east and find the Table Rock Cross upon the plateau. The religious adherence of Boise is evident through the site's continued presence and the lack of debate following the 1999 march. The Table Rock cross and Boise’s acceptance of the religious symbol overlooking the state's capital prompts us to consider how deeply the state's settler history has been shaped by religious influence.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="ipnw-objects-0040" caption="Letters to the Editor on December 25, 1999 Idaho Statesman (Boise, Idaho)." %}

## Works Cited

- Idaho State Historical Society 2012. *Chapel of the Good Shephard and Mission School at Fort Hall*. 2012. Photograph. *Idaho State Archives*. [https://idahohistory.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p16281coll21/id/172/rec/6](https://idahohistory.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p16281coll21/id/172/rec/6)

- *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), December 25, 1999: 26. *NewsBank: Access World News – Historical and Current*. <https://idahostatesman.newspapers.com/image/917254404/?match=1&terms=Letters%20>

- Idaho Statesman (Boise, Idaho), June 17, 1957: 4. NewsBank: Access World News – Historical and Current. <https://idahostatesman.newspapers.com/newspage/723799000/>

- *Idaho Statesman Today's Edition, The (Boise, ID) (Boise, Idaho), September 21, 2025: 257. NewsBank: Access World News – Historical and Current. [https://infoweb-newsbank-com.proxy.boisepubliclibrary.org/apps/news/document-view?p=WORLDNEWS&docref=image/v2%3A19BD521E33C0E6C0%40AWNB-1A33EDCAEBEAF732%402460940-1A33EDE291671479%40256-1A33EDE291671479%40](https://infoweb-newsbank-com.proxy.boisepubliclibrary.org/apps/news/document-view?p=WORLDNEWS&docref=image/v2%3A19BD521E33C0E6C0%40AWNB-1A33EDCAEBEAF732%402460940-1A33EDE291671479%40256-1A33EDE291671479%40).*


[^1]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross,” Accessed October 3, 2025, [https://www.idahoarchitectureproject.org/properties/table-rock-cross/](https://www.idahoarchitectureproject.org/properties/table-rock-cross/).

[^2]: *Table Rock Cross*, January 2025, Photograph, *Boise State University Special Collections and Archives,* [https://boisestate.starter1ua.preservica.com/portal/asset/sdb%3AIO%7C1046d747-6fcb-4818-bf4c-efa69398120b?keyword=Table](https://boisestate.starter1ua.preservica.com/portal/asset/sdb%3AIO%7C1046d747-6fcb-4818-bf4c-efa69398120b?keyword=Table)

[^4]: Adam M. Sowards, *Idaho’s Place: A New History of the Gem State* (University of Washington Press, 2014).

[^5]: Sowards, *Idaho’s Place*.

[^7]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross.”

[^8]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross.”

[^9]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross.”

[^10]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross.”

[^11]: Idaho Architecture Project, “Table Rock Cross.”

[^12]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), June 17, 1957

[^14]: Sowards, *Idaho’s Place*.

[^15]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), November 28, 1999

[^16]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), November 28, 1999

[^17]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), November 28, 1999

[^18]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), November 28, 1999

[^19]: *Idaho Statesman* (Boise, Idaho), November 28, 1999
